README.md, before:

# Secure environment variable management with SOPS + age

This document describes the setup and usage of SOPS (Secrets OPerationS) with age encryption for managing sensitive environment variables securely.

## Overview

This setup allows you to:
- Store API keys, private keys, and other secrets encrypted at rest
- Decrypt secrets only when needed (in memory)
- Avoid storing plaintext credentials on disk
- Backup encryption keys securely in KeePassXC
- Version control encrypted files safely (optional)

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ ~/.age/key.txt                                              │
│ (age encryption key - backed up in KeePassXC)               │
└─────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────┘
                  │
                  ├─ encrypts/decrypts ─┐
                  │                      │
                  ▼                      ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐  ┌──────────────────────────┐
│ ~/.secrets/                 │  │ Project: .local-test.env │
│ web3-ethereum-defi.env      │  │ (sources encrypted file) │
│ (encrypted secrets file)    │  │                          │
└─────────────────────────────┘  └──────────────────────────┘
                                           │
                                           ▼
                                  ┌──────────────────────┐
                                  │ Runtime: decrypted   │
                                  │ env vars in memory   │
                                  └──────────────────────┘
```

## Tools required

- **age**: Modern encryption tool
- **sops**: Secrets management tool by Mozilla
- **keepassxc-cli**: KeePassXC command-line interface for key backup

## Installation

```bash
# macOS (Homebrew)
brew install age sops keepassxc-cli

# Linux (Debian/Ubuntu)
sudo apt install age sops keepassxc

# Linux (Fedora)
sudo dnf install age sops keepassxc
```

## Initial setup process

### 1. Generate age encryption key

```bash
# Create age directory
mkdir -p ~/.age

# Generate key pair
age-keygen -o ~/.age/key.txt

# View your public key
cat ~/.age/key.txt
```

**Output example:**
```
# created: 2026-01-09T11:40:37+05:30
# public key: age12ezrg2zd654krydl73lnu78sz0pcpkuvj3vwwz3dyef62c2fmynqjesdvv
AGE-SECRET-KEY-1Q5V957WLTUV5GDXG55R6QQ7AH3SLDSPCF3Z77P2SWPGHJ4ZHJFPQSGGK0S
```

### 2. Configure SOPS to use age

```bash
# Create secrets directory
mkdir -p ~/.secrets

# Create SOPS configuration
cat > ~/.secrets/.sops.yaml << 'EOF'
creation_rules:
  - age: age12ezrg2zd654krydl73lnu78sz0pcpkuvj3vwwz3dyef62c2fmynqjesdvv
EOF
```

**Important:** Replace the public key with your actual public key from step 1.

### 3. Create encrypted secrets file

```bash
# Set the age key location
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt

# Create plaintext template
cat > ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi-plain.env << 'EOF'
# Web3 Ethereum DeFi Secrets
# Replace these with your actual values

# RPC URLs (space-separated fallback format)
JSON_RPC_ETHEREUM=https://your-ethereum-rpc-url-here
JSON_RPC_ARBITRUM=https://your-arbitrum-rpc-url-here
JSON_RPC_POLYGON=https://your-polygon-rpc-url-here

# Private keys (if needed for testing)
PRIVATE_KEY=0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000

# API keys (add as needed)
ETHERSCAN_API_KEY=YOUR_ETHERSCAN_API_KEY
ARBISCAN_API_KEY=YOUR_ARBISCAN_API_KEY
EOF

# Encrypt the file
cd ~/.secrets
sops --encrypt --input-type dotenv --output-type dotenv web3-ethereum-defi-plain.env > web3-ethereum-defi.env

# Delete plaintext file
rm web3-ethereum-defi-plain.env
```

### 4. Configure project to decrypt secrets

In your project repository, create `.local-test.env` (this file should be gitignored):

```bash
# Set SOPS age key location
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt

# Decrypt and export all environment variables from encrypted file
eval "$(SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt sops --decrypt --input-type dotenv --output-type dotenv ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env | sed 's/^/export /')"
```

### 5. Backup age key to KeePassXC

```bash
# Create KeePassXC database (if not exists)
mkdir -p ~/.secrets/keepass
keepassxc-cli db-create ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx

# Backup age key as attachment
keepassxc-cli attachment-import ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
  "SOPS-age-encryption-key" \
  "age-key.txt" \
  ~/.age/key.txt
```

This stores the age key as an attachment in your KeePassXC database under the entry "SOPS-age-encryption-key".

## Daily usage

### Using secrets in projects

```bash
# Source the environment file
source .local-test.env

# Run your commands with decrypted secrets
poetry run python script.py

# Or combine them
source .local-test.env && poetry run pytest tests/
```

### Editing encrypted secrets

```bash
# Set the key location
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt

# Edit encrypted file (opens in your default editor)
sops ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env
```

The file will be decrypted in memory, opened in your editor, and re-encrypted when you save and exit.

### Viewing encrypted secrets

```bash
# Decrypt and view (without editing)
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
sops --decrypt ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env
```

### Adding new secrets

```bash
# Option 1: Edit the file directly
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
sops ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env
# Add your new variables, save and exit

# Option 2: Use sops set command
sops --set '["NEW_API_KEY"] "your-new-api-key-value"' ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env
```

## Backup and recovery

### Backup your age key

Your age key is stored in KeePassXC. To verify:

```bash
# List attachments in the entry
keepassxc-cli attachment-export ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
  "SOPS-age-encryption-key" \
  "age-key.txt" \
  /tmp/age-key-backup.txt

# View the exported key
cat /tmp/age-key-backup.txt

# Securely delete the temporary file
shred -u /tmp/age-key-backup.txt  # Linux
# or
rm -P /tmp/age-key-backup.txt     # macOS
```

### Restore age key from KeePassXC

If you lose your `~/.age/key.txt`, restore it from KeePassXC:

```bash
# Export from KeePassXC
keepassxc-cli attachment-export ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
  "SOPS-age-encryption-key" \
  "age-key.txt" \
  ~/.age/key.txt

# Set correct permissions
chmod 600 ~/.age/key.txt
```

### Backup encrypted secrets file

The encrypted file `~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env` can be safely backed up or version controlled:

```bash
# Copy to backup location
cp ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env ~/Backups/

# Or commit to a private git repository
cd ~/.secrets
git init
git add web3-ethereum-defi.env .sops.yaml
git commit -m "Add encrypted secrets"
git remote add origin git@github.com:yourusername/secrets.git
git push -u origin main
```

## Replicating this environment on a new machine

### Quick setup

Use the setup script:

```bash
./setup-sops-age.sh
```

### Manual setup

1. **Install tools:**
   ```bash
   brew install age sops keepassxc-cli  # macOS
   ```

2. **Restore age key from KeePassXC:**
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.age
   keepassxc-cli attachment-export ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
     "SOPS-age-encryption-key" \
     "age-key.txt" \
     ~/.age/key.txt
   chmod 600 ~/.age/key.txt
   ```

3. **Copy encrypted secrets file:**
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.secrets
   # Copy from backup or git clone
   ```

4. **Configure project:**
  ```bash
  cd /path/to/project
  cat > .local-test.env << 'EOF' 
  export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
  eval "$(SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt sops --decrypt --input-type dotenv --output-type dotenv ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env | sed 's/^/export /')"
  EOF
  ```

5. **Test:**
   ```bash
   source .local-test.env
   env | grep JSON_RPC
   ```

## Security best practices

### File permissions

```bash
# Restrict access to age key
chmod 600 ~/.age/key.txt

# Restrict access to KeePassXC database
chmod 600 ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx
```

### gitignore patterns

Add to your project's `.gitignore`:

```
.local-test.env
.env
.env.local
*.key
*.pem
```

### Key rotation

To rotate your age key:

```bash
# Generate new key
age-keygen -o ~/.age/key-new.txt

# Update SOPS config with new public key
# Edit ~/.secrets/.sops.yaml

# Re-encrypt secrets with new key
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
sops --rotate --add-age <NEW_PUBLIC_KEY> ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env

# Backup new key to KeePassXC
keepassxc-cli attachment-import ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
  "SOPS-age-encryption-key-new" \
  "age-key-new.txt" \
  ~/.age/key-new.txt

# Replace old key
mv ~/.age/key-new.txt ~/.age/key.txt
```

## Troubleshooting

### "SOPS not found" error

```bash
which sops
# If not found, install: brew install sops
```

### "Failed to get data key" error

This means SOPS cannot find your age key. Set the environment variable:

```bash
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
```

### "Invalid credentials" when using KeePassXC

Ensure you're entering the correct master password for your KeePassXC database.

### Decryption fails

Verify your age key is correct:

```bash
cat ~/.age/key.txt
# Should show the age secret key
```

## File locations reference

| File | Location | Purpose | Backup? |
|------|----------|---------|---------|
| Age key | `~/.age/key.txt` | Encryption key | ✅ In KeePassXC |
| SOPS config | `~/.secrets/.sops.yaml` | SOPS settings | ✅ Optional |
| Encrypted secrets | `~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env` | Encrypted env vars | ✅ Yes |
| KeePassXC DB | `~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx` | Key backup | ✅ Yes |
| Project loader | `.local-test.env` | Per-project file | ❌ Gitignored |

## Additional resources

- [SOPS Documentation](https://github.com/mozilla/sops)
- [age Documentation](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age)
- [KeePassXC Documentation](https://keepassxc.org/docs/)

## Changelog

- **2026-01-09**: Initial setup with SOPS + age + KeePassXC

Commit message:

Updated and modified files for the project - Updated files:   - QUICKSTART.md   - README.md

README.md, after:

# Secure environment variable management with SOPS + age

This document describes the setup and usage of SOPS (Secrets OPerationS) with age encryption for managing sensitive environment variables securely.

## Overview

This setup allows you to:
- Store API keys, private keys, and other secrets encrypted at rest
- Decrypt secrets only when needed (in memory)
- Avoid storing plaintext credentials on disk
- Backup encryption keys securely in KeePassXC
- Version control encrypted files safely (optional)

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ ~/.age/key.txt                                              │
│ (age encryption key - backed up in KeePassXC)               │
└─────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────┘
                  │
                  ├─ encrypts/decrypts ─┐
                  │                      │
                  ▼                      ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐  ┌──────────────────────────┐
│ ~/.secrets/                 │  │ Project: .local-test.env │
│ web3-ethereum-defi.env      │  │ (sources encrypted file) │
│ (encrypted secrets file)    │  │                          │
└─────────────────────────────┘  └──────────────────────────┘
                                           │
                                           ▼
                                  ┌──────────────────────┐
                                  │ Runtime: decrypted   │
                                  │ env vars in memory   │
                                  └──────────────────────┘
```

## Tools required

- **[age](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age)**: A simple, modern, and secure file encryption tool, format, and Go library. age uses ChaCha20-Poly1305 for encryption and provides a simple command-line interface for encrypting and decrypting files with small explicit keys.

- **[sops](https://github.com/mozilla/sops)**: Secrets OPerationS (SOPS) is an editor of encrypted files that supports YAML, JSON, ENV, INI and BINARY formats and encrypts with AWS KMS, GCP KMS, Azure Key Vault, age, and PGP. SOPS allows you to encrypt only the values in your files while keeping the keys in plaintext, making it ideal for version control.

- **[keepassxc-cli](https://github.com/keepassxreboot/keepassxc)**: Command-line interface for KeePassXC, a cross-platform password manager. Used here to securely backup and restore the age encryption key as an attachment in an encrypted KeePassXC database.

## Installation

```bash
# macOS (Homebrew)
brew install age sops keepassxc-cli

# Linux (Debian/Ubuntu)
sudo apt install age sops keepassxc

# Linux (Fedora)
sudo dnf install age sops keepassxc
```

## Initial setup process

### 1. Generate age encryption key

```bash
# Create age directory
mkdir -p ~/.age

# Generate key pair
age-keygen -o ~/.age/key.txt

# View your public key
cat ~/.age/key.txt
```

**Output example:**
```
# created: 2026-01-09T11:40:37+05:30
# public key: age12ezrg2zd654krydl73lnu78sz0pcpkuvj3vwwz3dyef62c2fmynqjesdvv
AGE-SECRET-KEY-1Q5V957WLTUV5GDXG55R6QQ7AH3SLDSPCF3Z77P2SWPGHJ4ZHJFPQSGGK0S
```

### 2. Configure SOPS to use age

```bash
# Create secrets directory
mkdir -p ~/.secrets

# Create SOPS configuration
cat > ~/.secrets/.sops.yaml << 'EOF'
creation_rules:
  - age: age12ezrg2zd654krydl73lnu78sz0pcpkuvj3vwwz3dyef62c2fmynqjesdvv
EOF
```

**Important:** Replace the public key with your actual public key from step 1.

### 3. Create encrypted secrets file

```bash
# Set the age key location
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt

# Create plaintext template
cat > ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi-plain.env << 'EOF'
# Web3 Ethereum DeFi Secrets
# Replace these with your actual values

# RPC URLs (space-separated fallback format)
JSON_RPC_ETHEREUM=https://your-ethereum-rpc-url-here
JSON_RPC_ARBITRUM=https://your-arbitrum-rpc-url-here
JSON_RPC_POLYGON=https://your-polygon-rpc-url-here

# Private keys (if needed for testing)
PRIVATE_KEY=0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000

# API keys (add as needed)
ETHERSCAN_API_KEY=YOUR_ETHERSCAN_API_KEY
ARBISCAN_API_KEY=YOUR_ARBISCAN_API_KEY
EOF

# Encrypt the file
cd ~/.secrets
sops --encrypt --input-type dotenv --output-type dotenv web3-ethereum-defi-plain.env > web3-ethereum-defi.env

# Delete plaintext file
rm web3-ethereum-defi-plain.env
```

### 4. Configure project to decrypt secrets

In your project repository, create `.local-test.env` (this file should be gitignored):

```bash
# Set SOPS age key location
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt

# Decrypt and export all environment variables from encrypted file
eval "$(SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt sops --decrypt --input-type dotenv --output-type dotenv ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env | sed 's/^/export /')"
```

### 5. Backup age key to KeePassXC

```bash
# Create KeePassXC database (if not exists)
mkdir -p ~/.secrets/keepass
keepassxc-cli db-create ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx

# Backup age key as attachment
keepassxc-cli attachment-import ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
  "SOPS-age-encryption-key" \
  "age-key.txt" \
  ~/.age/key.txt
```

This stores the age key as an attachment in your KeePassXC database under the entry "SOPS-age-encryption-key".

## Daily usage

### Using secrets in projects

```bash
# Source the environment file
source .local-test.env

# Run your commands with decrypted secrets
poetry run python script.py

# Or combine them
source .local-test.env && poetry run pytest tests/
```

### Editing encrypted secrets

```bash
# Set the key location
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt

# Edit encrypted file (opens in your default editor)
sops ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env
```

The file will be decrypted in memory, opened in your editor, and re-encrypted when you save and exit.

### Viewing encrypted secrets

```bash
# Decrypt and view (without editing)
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
sops --decrypt ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env
```

### Adding new secrets

```bash
# Option 1: Edit the file directly
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
sops ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env
# Add your new variables, save and exit

# Option 2: Use sops set command
sops --set '["NEW_API_KEY"] "your-new-api-key-value"' ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env
```

## Backup and recovery

### Backup your age key

Your age key is stored in KeePassXC. To verify:

```bash
# List attachments in the entry
keepassxc-cli attachment-export ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
  "SOPS-age-encryption-key" \
  "age-key.txt" \
  /tmp/age-key-backup.txt

# View the exported key
cat /tmp/age-key-backup.txt

# Securely delete the temporary file
shred -u /tmp/age-key-backup.txt  # Linux
# or
rm -P /tmp/age-key-backup.txt     # macOS
```

### Restore age key from KeePassXC

If you lose your `~/.age/key.txt`, restore it from KeePassXC:

```bash
# Export from KeePassXC
keepassxc-cli attachment-export ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
  "SOPS-age-encryption-key" \
  "age-key.txt" \
  ~/.age/key.txt

# Set correct permissions
chmod 600 ~/.age/key.txt
```

### Backup encrypted secrets file

The encrypted file `~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env` can be safely backed up or version controlled:

```bash
# Copy to backup location
cp ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env ~/Backups/

# Or commit to a private git repository
cd ~/.secrets
git init
git add web3-ethereum-defi.env .sops.yaml
git commit -m "Add encrypted secrets"
git remote add origin git@github.com:yourusername/secrets.git
git push -u origin main
```

## Replicating this environment on a new machine

### Quick setup

Use the setup script:

```bash
./setup-sops-age.sh
```

### Manual setup

1. **Install tools:**
   ```bash
   brew install age sops keepassxc-cli  # macOS
   ```

2. **Restore age key from KeePassXC:**
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.age
   keepassxc-cli attachment-export ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
     "SOPS-age-encryption-key" \
     "age-key.txt" \
     ~/.age/key.txt
   chmod 600 ~/.age/key.txt
   ```

3. **Copy encrypted secrets file:**
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.secrets
   # Copy from backup or git clone
   ```

4. **Configure project:**
  ```bash
  cd /path/to/project
  cat > .local-test.env << 'EOF' 
  export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
  eval "$(SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt sops --decrypt --input-type dotenv --output-type dotenv ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env | sed 's/^/export /')"
  EOF
  ```

5. **Test:**
   ```bash
   source .local-test.env
   env | grep JSON_RPC
   ```

## Security best practices

### File permissions

```bash
# Restrict access to age key
chmod 600 ~/.age/key.txt

# Restrict access to KeePassXC database
chmod 600 ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx
```

### gitignore patterns

Add to your project's `.gitignore`:

```
.local-test.env
.env
.env.local
*.key
*.pem
```

### Key rotation

To rotate your age key:

```bash
# Generate new key
age-keygen -o ~/.age/key-new.txt

# Update SOPS config with new public key
# Edit ~/.secrets/.sops.yaml

# Re-encrypt secrets with new key
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
sops --rotate --add-age <NEW_PUBLIC_KEY> ~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env

# Backup new key to KeePassXC
keepassxc-cli attachment-import ~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx \
  "SOPS-age-encryption-key-new" \
  "age-key-new.txt" \
  ~/.age/key-new.txt

# Replace old key
mv ~/.age/key-new.txt ~/.age/key.txt
```

## Troubleshooting

### "SOPS not found" error

```bash
which sops
# If not found, install: brew install sops
```

### "Failed to get data key" error

This means SOPS cannot find your age key. Set the environment variable:

```bash
export SOPS_AGE_KEY_FILE=~/.age/key.txt
```

### "Invalid credentials" when using KeePassXC

Ensure you're entering the correct master password for your KeePassXC database.

### Decryption fails

Verify your age key is correct:

```bash
cat ~/.age/key.txt
# Should show the age secret key
```

## File locations reference

| File | Location | Purpose | Backup? |
|------|----------|---------|---------|
| Age key | `~/.age/key.txt` | Encryption key | ✅ In KeePassXC |
| SOPS config | `~/.secrets/.sops.yaml` | SOPS settings | ✅ Optional |
| Encrypted secrets | `~/.secrets/web3-ethereum-defi.env` | Encrypted env vars | ✅ Yes |
| KeePassXC DB | `~/.secrets/keepass/secrets.kdbx` | Key backup | ✅ Yes |
| Project loader | `.local-test.env` | Per-project file | ❌ Gitignored |

## Additional resources

- [SOPS GitHub Repository & Documentation](https://github.com/mozilla/sops)
- [age GitHub Repository & Documentation](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age)
- [KeePassXC GitHub Repository](https://github.com/keepassxreboot/keepassxc)
- [KeePassXC Official Documentation](https://keepassxc.org/docs/)

## Changelog

- **2026-01-09**: Initial setup with SOPS + age + KeePassXC
